Imagine you and your team are developing an application. The first version is done. Now it's time to deploy the app on a server. You check in your code and try to merge it into the main branch. You get merge conflicts because other engineers made code changes before you. You fix those issues manually. You try to merge again. A simple Jenkins job runs tests on the main and discovers issues. Now we rush to fix them because we broke the main branch.

We fixed those issues. After all these fixes and code changes from different developers in the main branch, it's end of sprint. We want to deploy all our changes because we need to release them at some point. We do a code freeze which means no one's allowed to merge anything to main until we deploy the current state with all those changes.

Once all the issues are resolved and the main branch is tested to the best of our ability, it's deploy time. We take a deep breath to prepare mentally. Someone on the team checks out the main branch locally. They bump the release version and push that to git. We have a simple Jenkins build that runs some tests, builds a Docker image and pushes to the Docker repository. The build is over. Now we manually modify a Docker compose file or Kubernetes manifest file.

Wouldn't it be more efficient if we ran those tests in the feature branch itself before trying to merge it? Why are we waiting for it to be merged to test if it breaks anything? If we have multiple branches, let's test each one individually before we merge them back into the main. When three different features are merged at the same time with large code changes, we won't even know which combination had issues.

Why are we waiting right before merge to run those tests? Let's run them on every commit to the branch so it's easy to isolate the issue. Some developers program locally for days and then push the whole implementation at once. Instead we encourage our developers to commit and push more often so their smaller changes are tested frequently. If there are issues they can fix those before making more changes. We're committing smaller code changes more frequently and we test them right away. That's called continuous integration, or CI.
